---
layout: post
title: The Dhammacakkappavattana-sutta
author: C. van Gog
hide: true

---
### Introduction and Alternative Translations

Here we'll take a deeper look at the *Dhammacakkappavattana-sutta*. The first thing to note is that the original sutta is in Pāli, the Middle-Indo Aryan language we find in the Pali Canon. If you'd like to know more about this language, I would recommend Gombrich (2019). The translation at [The Buddha and the Early Buddhist Teachings](https://cuboids.page.link/isd1) is from Javier Fernandez-Viña, who so far translated about a dozen-and-a-half suttas from the Pali Canon into English. His approach relies on [dynamic equivalence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynamic_and_formal_equivalence) and on [plain language](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plain_language), which felt quite refreshing to me: the suttas tend to be repetitive and many translations use archaic terminology. I generated the audio files with Google's Text-to-Speech API.

The benchmark translations, however, are those by Bhikkhu Sujato. I might write a seperate blog post about his 2015-ongoing translation project of the early portions of the Pali Canon later, but here I'll simply link to [Sujato's 2018 (revised) translation of the *Dhammacakkappavattana-sutta* at SuttaCentral](https://suttacentral.net/sn56.11/en/sujato) and [the accompanying audio at SuttaCentral Voice](https://voice.suttacentral.net/scv/index.html#/sutta?search=sn56.11&lang=en). Whereas Fernandez-Viña relies on dynamic equivalence, Sujato's translations are more precise and preserve the structure of the source texts. For more on the structure of the <abbr title="Early Buddhist Texts">EBTs</abbr>, cf. Anālayo (2007).

### Parallels

One of the most exciting facts about the EBTs is that many of them have parallels. This means we can compare the different versions and figure out which parts are likely authentic and which were added later. The *Dhammacakkappavattana-sutta* has many parallels, one of them being the *Mahākhandhaka*, preserved in the Theravāda Vinaya, which not only contains a full parallel to the Buddha's first discourse, but also full parallels to his second and third—"Not Self" and "On Fire". (A translation by Bhikkhu Brahmali is forthcoming.) For a translation and study of other parallels, see Anālayo (2012, 2013). 

### Selected Segments

<blockquote><b>SN 56.11:1.</b> At one time the Buddha was staying near Benares, in the deer park at Isipatana. There the Buddha addressed the group of five mendicants:</blockquote>
Benares corresponds to modern-day Varanasi, in Uttar Pradesh. Isipatana corresponds to Sarnath.

<blockquote><b>SN 56.11:2.</b> “Mendicants, these two extremes should not be cultivated by one who has gone forth.  What two?  Indulgence in sensual pleasures, which is low, crude, ordinary, ignoble, and pointless. And indulgence in self-mortification, which is painful, ignoble, and pointless. ( . . . )

Notice how its specifically those who have gone forth who are encouraged to avoid those extremes. The parallel versions corroborate this point (Anālayo 2012, 2013). For lay practicioners it may be more difficult to avoid indulging in sensual pleasures than for  Here I have found it helpful to compare the two extremes with their description in the [*Acelaka-vagga*](https://suttacentral.net/an3.156-162/en/sujato):

<blockquote><p><b>AN 3.156-162:1-6.</b> “Mendicants, there are three practices.  What three?  The addicted practice, the scorching practice, and the middle practice.</p>
<p>And what’s the addicted practice?  It’s when someone has this doctrine and view:  ‘There’s nothing wrong with sensual pleasures’;  so they throw themselves into sensual pleasures.  This is called the addicted practice.</p>
<p>And what’s the scorching practice?  It’s when someone goes naked, ignoring conventions. They lick their hands, and don’t come or wait when asked. They don’t consent to food brought to them, or food prepared on purpose for them, or an invitation for a meal.  They don’t receive anything from a pot or bowl; or from someone who keeps sheep, or who has a weapon or a shovel in their home; or where a couple is eating; or where there is a woman who is pregnant, breastfeeding, or who has a man in her home; or where there’s a dog waiting or flies buzzing. They accept no fish or meat or liquor or wine, and drink no beer.  They go to just one house for alms, taking just one mouthful, or two houses and two mouthfuls, up to seven houses and seven mouthfuls.  They feed on one saucer a day, two saucers a day, up to seven saucers a day.  They eat once a day, once every second day, up to once a week, and so on, even up to once a fortnight. They live pursuing the practice of eating food at set intervals.</p>
<p>They eat herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce, rice bran, scum from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung. They survive on forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen fruit.</p>
<p>They wear robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags, lodh tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark, wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls’ wings.  They tear out their hair and beard, committed to this practice.  They constantly stand, refusing seats.  They squat, committed to persisting in the squatting position.  They lie on a mat of thorns, making a mat of thorns their bed.  They pursue the practice of immersion in water three times a day, including the evening.  And so they live pursuing these various ways of mortifying and tormenting the body.  This is called the scorching practice.</p>
<p>And what’s the middle practice?  It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world.  They meditate observing an aspect of feelings …  They meditate observing an aspect of the mind …  They meditate observing an aspect of principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of desire and aversion for the world.  This is called the middle practice.</p>
<p>These are the three practices.</p>
<p>Mendicants, there are three practices.  What three?  The addicted practice, the scorching practice, the middle practice. ( . . . )</p>

</blockquote>

(more later)

**References**
* Gombrich, R.F. 2019. <a href="https://www.ocbs-courses.org/blog/buddhism-and-pali/">*Buddhism and Pali*</a>. Oxford: Mud Pie.
* Anālayo, Bh. 2007. ["Oral Dimensions of Pāli Discourses: Pericopes, other Mnemonic Techniques and the Oral Performance Context"](http://journals.sfu.ca/cjbs/index.php/cjbs/article/view/75). *Canadian Journal of Buddhist Studies* 3: 5-34.
* Anālayo, Bh. 2012. [The Chinese Parallels to the Dhammacakkappavattana-sutta (1)](http://jocbs.org/index.php/jocbs/article/view/25). *Journal of the Oxford Centre for Buddhist Studies* 3: 12–46.
* Anālayo, Bh. 2013. [The Chinese Parallels to the Dhammacakkappavattana-sutta (2)](http://jocbs.org/index.php/jocbs/article/view/53). *Journal of the Oxford Centre for Buddhist Studies*, 5: 9–41.

Short URL: cuboids.page.link/sn56-11
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTQzMTU3ODIwMCw4MTI1NDg2ODUsNDExMD
k3NjQ2LDExMTY1MzMxNSwtMTE0MDMxODgzMiwtMTExOTA0NTc5
NiwtODgxOTM1MzYyLDE1ODM1MTg4MTcsLTEyNzY2NjMyOTgsLT
g5MTcwODUyMywyMDA3NjMyNzcwLC0xMjQwNTE1MzQ5LDI2MjM3
NDA2OSwxOTE0OTU3MzM4XX0=
-->