---

<hr>
<p>layout: post<br>
title: A New Beginning!<br>
author: C. van Gog<br>
hide: True</p>
<hr>

---

<p>It is time for a new beginning. Let’s start with a single book: <i><a href="https://book4you.org/book/12636258/55f572">Science on a Mission</a> (2021)</i>.</p>
<blockquote>
<p>What difference does it make who pays for science?</p>
<p>Some might say none. If scientists seek to discover fundamental truths about the world, and they do so in an objective manner using well-established methods, then how could it matter who’s footing the bill? History, however, suggests otherwise. In science, as elsewhere, money is power. Tracing the recent history of oceanography, Naomi Oreskes discloses dramatic changes in American ocean science since the Cold War, uncovering how and why it changed. Much of it has to do with who pays.</p>
<p>After World War II, the US military turned to a new, uncharted theater of warfare: the deep sea. The earth sciences—particularly physical oceanography and marine geophysics—became essential to the US Navy, who poured unprecedented money and logistical support into their study. <em>Science on a Mission</em> brings to light how this influx of military funding was both enabling and constricting: it resulted in the creation of important domains of knowledge but also significant, lasting, and consequential domains of ignorance.</p>
<p>As Oreskes delves into the role of patronage in the history of science, what emerges is a vivid portrait of how naval oversight transformed what we know about the sea. It is a detailed, sweeping history that illuminates the ways funding shapes the subject, scope, and tenor of scientific work, and it raises profound questions about the purpose and character of American science. What difference does it make who pays? The short answer is: a lot. (<a href="https://www.amazon.com/Science-Mission-Military-Funding-Shaped/dp/022673238X">source</a>)</p>
</blockquote>
<p>And I’d also like to mention a mesmerizing opera I discovered today, <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Se9cBFbLDJc"><i>The Eigth Hour of Amduat</i></a> (2017). Some details:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>This opera for mezzosoprano, choir, improvising soloists, orchestra and electronics, and featuring the leader of the Sun Ra Arkestra, Marshall Allen on alto saxophone and electronics, is adapted from the earliest surviving illustrated book and sound score, The Book of the Amduat, painted on walls in the tombs of the Valley of the Kings and many papyri. We use the version in Tuthmose III’s tomb, who ruled Egypt from 1485-1431 BC. He is widely thought to be the Pharaoh of Exodus: if it wasn’t him, it was a close relative. He co-ruled at first with the female Pharaoh, Hatsepsut, and was great grandfather to Akhenaten. He built the obelisks known as Cleopatra’s Needle, one of which is on the Thames in London, and the other is near East 81st street in Central Park in New York City.</p>
<p>Each morning, Sun Ra emerges from a hole in the east and sails on a river through our sky. After he descends he continue from west to east on the river through the underworld, the Amudat, to reemerge in the morning. Each night he dies, but is reborn in the 6th night hour when he unites with Osiris and defeats the serpent, Apep.</p>
<p>The piece takes place during the 8th hour of the night, Mistress of deep night, in the city of the 8th hour, Sarcophagus of her gods. Sun Ra and his companions on the boat are being hauled by a choir on the underworld river. During the hour they are clothed and encounter other gods who live in ten caverns along the shore, along with living knives who defeat their enemies and four sacred rams. By earliest sound score, we mean that the specific sounds from each group of gods in each cavern of the city are described quite literally during the trip. (<a href="https://davesoldier.bandcamp.com/album/the-eight-hour-of-amduat">source</a>)</p>
</blockquote>
<p>See also <i><a href="https://book4you.org/book/3493357/6165a3">The Sungod’s Journey through the Netherworld</a> (2010)</i>.</p>
<blockquote>
<p>“The ancient Egyptian sources come alive, speaking to us without seeming alien to our modern ways of thinking. Andreas Schweizer invites us to join the nocturnal voyage of the solar barque and to immerse ourselves, with the ‘Great Soul’ of the sun, into the darkness surrounding us. Here in the illustrations and texts of the Amduat, threats hidden in the depths of our soul become visible as concrete images, an analysis of which remains ever worthwhile: even in the guise of the evil, ominous, or dark side of godhead with which Schweizer concerns himself. The netherworld into which we descend underlies our own world. Creative energies of dreadful intensity are active there, and only death, to which all must surrender, makes us truly alive by offering us regeneration from the depths.”―Erik Hornung, from the Foreword</p>
<p>The Amduat (literally “that which is in the netherworld”) tells the story of the nocturnal journey of Re, the Egyptian Sungod, through the netherworld from the time when the sun dies, after setting in the west, to its rebirth at sunrise in the east. In the middle of the night, in the profoundest depths of the netherworld, this resurrection is made possible by a mystical union of the sun with the mummified body of Osiris, god of the dead. This great mystery of the union between the freely moving soul of the Sungod, longing for the bright and boundless sky, with Osiris’s corpse, which is irrevocably bound to the subterranean realm of the dead, evokes the renewal of all life and the restoration of totality.</p>
<p>In the Egyptian belief system, the pharaohs and in later times all blessed dead embarked on this same “night-sea journey” after death, ultimately becoming one with Re and living forever. The vision of the afterlife elaborated in the Amduat, dating from around 1500 B.C.E., has been influential for millennia, providing the model for an entire genre of Egyptian literature, the Books of the Afterlife, which in turn endured into the Greco-Roman era. Its themes and images persisted into gnostic and alchemical texts and made their way into early Christian portrayals of the beyond.</p>
<p>In The Sungod’s Journey through the Netherworld, Andreas Schweizer guides the reader through the Amduat, offering a psychological interpretation of its principal textual and iconographic elements. He is concerned with themes that run deep and wide in human experience, drawing on Jungian archetypes to find similar expression in many cultures worldwide: sleep as death; resurrection as reawakening or rebirth; and salvation or redemption, whether from original sin (as for Christians) or from the total annihilation of death (as for the ancient Egyptians).</p>
</blockquote>

